<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//KDE//DTD DocBook XML V4.2-Based Variant V1.1//EN" "dtd/kdex.dtd" [
  <!ENTITY tablet "<application>KCM Tablet</application>">
  <!ENTITY kappname "&tablet;">
  <!ENTITY package "kcontrol">
  <!ENTITY kappversion "1.2"><!--Application version. Use this variable everywhere it's needed.-->
  <!ENTITY % addindex "IGNORE">
  <!ENTITY % English "INCLUDE">
]>
<book id="wacomtablet" lang="&language;">
    <bookinfo>
    <title>The &tablet; Handbook</title>

    <authorgroup>
	<author>
	    <firstname>Jörg</firstname>
	    <surname>Ehrichs</surname>
	    <affiliation>
		<address><email>joerg.ehrichs@gmx.de</email></address>
	    </affiliation>
	</author>
	<!-- TRANS:ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS -->
    </authorgroup>
    <copyright>
	<year>2009</year>
	<holder>Jörg Ehrichs</holder>
    </copyright>

    <legalnotice>&FDLNotice;</legalnotice>

    <date>2010-02-28</date><!-- Date of (re)writing, or update.-->
    <releaseinfo>&kappversion;</releaseinfo><!-- Application version number. Use the variable definitions within header to change this value.-->

    <abstract>
	<para>This is the documentation for the &kde; &systemsettings; module that configures graphic tablets.</para>
    </abstract>

    <keywordset>
	<keyword>KDE</keyword><!-- do not change this! -->
	<keyword>System Settings</keyword>
	<keyword>Wacom</keyword>
	<keyword>Tablet</keyword>
    </keywordset>

    </bookinfo>

    <chapter id="introduction">
    <title>Wacom Tablet Settings</title>
    <para>
	The tablet &systemsettings; module handles all setting for your graphic tablet. All tablets supported by
	the <ulink url="http://linuxwacom.sourceforge.net">&Linux; Wacom driver</ulink> project are handled by this settings interface.
	Make sure your tablet is detected either via xorg.conf or HAL and works in general. Refer to the <link linkend="detection">tablet detection</link> section for more information.
    </para>
    <important>
	<para>
	    The <application>wacom-tools</application> or the <application>xf86-input-wacom</application> driver must be installed on your computer and <command>xsetwacom</command> must be available
	    in order to make this module work correctly.
	</para>
    </important>
    <para>
	The module is split into various tab pages that handle all aspects of your tablet and the pen:
	<link linkend="tablet-profiles">Profiles</link>,
	<link linkend="tablet-general">General Information</link>,
	<link linkend="pad-buttons">Pad Buttons</link>,
        <link linkend="pad-mapping">Pad Mapping</link>,
	<link linkend="screen-setup">Screen Setup</link>,
	<link linkend="stylus">Stylus Settings</link> and
	<link linkend="eraser">Eraser Settings</link>.
    </para>
    <sect1 id="tablet-profiles">
	<title>Profile Management</title>
	
	<para>
	    This is the small drop down box with the two buttons next to it. You can create new profiles and delete already existing ones.
	    Each profile is saved and specified for the currently connected tablet. If you create a new profile, it automatically creates one
	    with the default settings as returned by the wacom-tools.
	</para>
	
	<para>
	    Here you can specify different profiles for your settings.
	    For example if you like to have a different behavior of the pen when you use it
	    as a mouse replacement for your day to day work or using it as pen to draw something.
	</para>
	<para>
	    Each profile can be changed on the fly and directly changes the behavior of your tablet input.
	</para>
	<note>
	    <para>
		The <link linkend="kded">kded tablet daemon</link> must be running in the background to be able to change the profiles and apply them to the tablet.
		All the work is done by the daemon. The &systemsettings; module just change the profile settings for it.
	    </para>
	</note>
    </sect1>
      
    <sect1 id="tablet-general">
	<title>General Tablet Settings and Information</title>
	
	<para>
	    Shows some general Information about the detected tablet.
	    Beside the name and company of your tablet an image is shown and all detected input devices are listed.
	</para>
	
	<note>
	    <para>
		The tablet must be connected and the <link linkend="kded">kded</link> must be running to allow the module to work correctly.
	    </para>
	    <para>
                See the <link linkend="troubles">Detection problems</link> section for further help on the tablet detection.
	    </para>
	</note>
    </sect1>
    
    <sect1 id="pad-buttons">
	<title>Pad Button Settings</title>
	
	<para>
	    Here you can set different actions for each pad button, the touch ring or touch strip on your tablet if available.
	</para>
	<para>
	    Available actions are:
	    <itemizedlist>
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Disable</guilabel> :
			disables the button.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Button</guilabel> :
			emulates a general button event press.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Keystroke</guilabel> :
			emulates a keystroke or special key press (for example <keycap>F1</keycap> or <keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>C</keycap></keycombo>).
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>QuoteDbl</guilabel> :
			emulates a text string. For example you could print <quote>Hello World</quote> at the current cursor position.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
	    </itemizedlist>
	</para>
    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="pad-mapping">
        <title>Pad Mapping Settings</title>

        <para>
            This pages change the behavior of the tablet working area. It can be rotated and reduced in size.
        </para>
        <para>
            The <guilabel>Working area</guilabel> spans the whole tablet by default. The <guilabel>Top X/Y</guilabel> and <guilabel>Bottom X/Y</guilabel> coordinates can be changed to change the aspect ratio of the tablet and thus match
            the screen ratio.
        </para>
    </sect1>
    
    <sect1 id="screen-setup">
	<title>Screen Setup</title>
	
	<para>
	    This will setup your tablet to match your screens. The multi monitor setup is realized via Nvidia TwinView support.
	</para>
	<para>	
	    <itemizedlist>
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>TwinView</guilabel> :
			Nvidia TwinView option. Select how to connect your multi monitor setup.
			You need to specify the right screen resolutions as well, otherwise it won't work as you expect.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Resolution</guilabel> :
			Specifies the Meta Mode for the monitors.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Multi Monitor</guilabel> :
			Turns on/off across monitor movement in multi-monitor desktop.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Map to screen</guilabel> :
			Maps the cursor to a specific monitor if across monitor movement is switched off.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
	    </itemizedlist>
	</para>

        <note><para>
            The button actions screen toggle and display toggle change the multi monitor behavior on the fly. See the <link linkend="stylus">stylus</link> section for more information.
        </para></note>
    </sect1>
    
    <sect1 id="stylus">
	<title>Stylus Settings</title>
	
	<para>
	    The pen that is used together with the tablet has two different sides, the main side is called stylus.
	    With this dialog you can change any aspect of the stylus side and the buttons on the pen to adjust them to your needs.
	</para>
	
	<sect2 id="cursor-settings"><title>Cursor Settings</title>
	    <para>
	    <itemizedlist>
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Mode</guilabel> :
			Change the pen mode between absolute and relative input.
			Relative acts more like a mouse while absolute is like a pen on the paper position.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Speed</guilabel> :
			Sets relative cursor movement speed
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Threshold</guilabel> :
			Sets tip/eraser pressure threshold.
		    </para>
		</listitem>
		
		<listitem>
		    <para><guilabel>Pressure</guilabel> :
			Change the press curve. The curve is shown in a new dialog and you can change the Bézier curve with the
			red dots. The curve defines how the pressure of the pen is translated.
		    </para>
		    <note><para>
			Use your pen inside the press curve dialog to see the changes in the press curve directly.
			A blue area below the curve shows the applied pressure of the pen.
		    </para></note>
		</listitem>
	    </itemizedlist>
	    </para>
	</sect2>
	
	<sect2 id="tip-double-click-distance"><title>Tip Double Click Distance</title>
	    <para>
		Defines how fast you need to tap the tip of the pen on the tablet to be recognize it as a double click instead
		of two single clicks.
	    </para>
	</sect2>
	
	<sect2 id="pen-button-settings"><title>Button Settings</title>
	    <para>
		This lets you map the tip and the two additional buttons on your pen with different actions.
	    </para>
	    <para>
		Available actions are:
		<itemizedlist>
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Disable</guilabel> :
			    disables the button.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Button</guilabel> :
			    emulates a general button event press.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Left Click</guilabel> :
			    emulates a left mouse button click event.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Middle Click</guilabel> :
			    emulates a middle mouse button click event.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Right Click</guilabel> :
			    emulates a right mouse button click event.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Double Click</guilabel> :
			    emulates a double click event.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Keystroke</guilabel> :
			    emulates a keystroke or special key press (for example <keycap>F1</keycap> or <keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>C</keycap></keycombo>).
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>QuoteDbl</guilabel> :
			    emulates a text string. For example you could print <quote>Hello World</quote> at the current cursor position.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Mode Toggle</guilabel> :
			    change the pen mode between absolute and relative input.
			    Relative acts more like a mouse while absolute is like a pen on the paper position.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Screen Toggle</guilabel> : 
			    If more than one screen is connected and TwinView is deactivated this allows you to switch the current used screen.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		    
		    <listitem>
			<para><guilabel>Display Toggle</guilabel> : 
			    Toggles between multi monitor and single monitor mode. Thus allows to move from one screen to another.
			</para>
		    </listitem>
		</itemizedlist>
	    </para>
	</sect2>
    </sect1>
    
    <sect1 id="eraser">
	<title>Eraser Settings</title>
	
	<para>
	    If you turn around the pen it will be recognized as eraser instead as pen. This allows to change the settings independent to the stylus side.
	    All parameters are as described in the <link linkend="stylus">stylus</link> section.
	</para>
    </sect1>
    </chapter>
    
    <chapter id="kded">
    <title>Tablet daemon</title>
    <para>
        The tablet daemon runs in the background and does the ground work. Detecting the tablet and set it up with the selected profiles.
        If the daemon is not running the &systemsettings; module and the plasma applet cannot work properly and the tablet cannot be used with the profiles.
    </para>

    <sect1 id="detection">
        <title>Tablet detection</title>
        <para>
            The detection of the <hardware>tablet device</hardware> is done in several ways.
            <application>Solid</application> is used in the first step and does the hotplug support.
            If Solid fails the next steps are <command>xsetwacom list dev</command>, <command>lsusb</command> and <command>xinput --list</command>.
        </para>
        <para>
            Should none of the commands above return the name of the tablet, it is not supported and cannot be used by this module.
        </para>
    </sect1>
    <sect1 id="troubles">
        <title>Detection problems</title>
        <para>
            If the tablet is not detected check the <ulink url="http://linuxwacom.sourceforge.net">&Linux; Wacom driver</ulink> page if your tablet is supported.
            Furthermore check via <command>lsusb</command> if you can find your tablet.
        </para>
        <para>
            If HAL does not handle the detection add the tablet to your <filename>/etc/X11/xorg.conf</filename> file and restart the x-server.
        </para>
        <para>
            In case of a serial device (Tablet PC and such) check if <command>xinput --list</command> lists your input devices (Stylus/Eraser/Pad).
            Should they be listed take a look at the internal tablet device id via <command>xsetwacom get "Name of your pad or stylus" TabletID</command>.
            If an id is returned please mail all the necessary information to the author.
        </para>
        <note>
        <para>
            Hotplug support is only available if the tablet is found via <application>Solid</application> and its notification API.
        </para>
        <para>
            <application>Solid</application> checks if the value for the entry <command>input.x11_options.Type</command> is <command>pen</command>,
            <command>stylus</command>, <command>eraser</command> or <command>cursor</command> or if the value for the entry <command>input.x11_driver</command> is <command>wacom</command>.
        </para>
        <para>
            Please mail the author if your tablet is detected by Solid but with other values to enhance the tablet support.
        </para>
        </note>
    </sect1>
    </chapter>

    <chapter id="applet">
    <title>Tablet plasma applet</title>
    <para>
        The tablet applet makes it possible to change the available profiles on the fly. Furthermore you can change the pad rotation and switch between absolute/relative mode
        of the stylus/eraser regardless of the current profile settings.
    </para>
    <para>
        It is not necessary to add the plasmoid for this module to work. The default profile will be activated by the  <link linkend="kded">tablet daemon</link> as soon as it
        detects your tablet even if the plasmoid is not used. The plasmoid is just a visual helper to switch easily between the profiles.
    </para>
    </chapter>
    <chapter id="credits"><title>Credits and License</title> 
    <!-- TRANS:CREDIT_FOR_TRANSLATORS -->

    &underFDL;

    &underGPL;
    
    </chapter>
</book>
